The periodic table is not a colourful wall poster invented
to frighten classrooms. It is a map of the element types.
Each tile says: here is one kind of atom that nature can
use.
Hydrogen is H. Oxygen is O. Carbon is C. Copper is Cu.
Iron is Fe. Gold is Au.
Some symbols are obvious. C for carbon is friendly. O for
oxygen is practically waving.
Some are older-name surprises. Iron is Fe from ferrum.
Copper is Cu from cuprum. Gold is Au from aurum. Chemistry
has history tucked inside its labels.
You do not need to memorise the whole table today. But you
should know what the table is doing.
Each element has a position. The position is not random.
The table is arranged by atomic number. For this course,
think of atomic number as the element's address on the
Hydrogen is number one. Helium is number two. Carbon is
six. Oxygen is eight. Copper is twenty-nine. Gold is
seventy-nine.
The table also shows patterns. Many metals live across the
left and middle. Non-metals sit mostly toward the right.
Columns are called groups. Elements in the same group
often behave in related ways. Rows are called periods.
They show the order across the map.
Try reading the map like a chemist. A tile gives you the
symbol, the name, and the address number. It is not asking
you to panic; it is giving you coordinates.
If the control room lights up C, think carbon: graphite in
pencil, diamond, and lots of living things. If it lights
up O, think oxygen: air, water, and many compounds.
If it lights up Fe, think iron: nails, tools, and rust
problems. If it lights up Cu, think copper: wires, coins,
and that warm orange-brown metal colour.
Now compare two tiles. Carbon and oxygen have different
symbols and different atomic numbers, so they are
different element types. A carbon atom does not become
That is why labels matter. In a particle diagram, two
circles can look similar, but C and O tell you they are
different atoms. The periodic table is the label key for
The table also helps avoid a common mistake. Water is not
on the periodic table because water is not an element. It
is made from elements. The table lists the building
Try this quick read: Na and Cl are element symbols. Sodium
chloride, table salt, is not a new periodic-table tile. It
is a compound made using element types from the table.
We are not doing electron shells today. The big idea is
enough: the periodic table is a map, not a memory
punishment.
When you see Cu on a coin or Fe on a lab card, think: atom
type. When you see the whole table, think: organised map
of elements.